OLAP : Online Analytical Processing. Is a category of software tools that provides analysis of data for business decision. OLAP allows to analyze information from multiple databases

Examples : Sales Figures comparable between
   months/countries/zones/regions/cities/branches/salesmanwise
Amazon analyse customers purchase patterns and recommending products on those lines.

note : The primary objective is data analysis and not data processing

OLTP : Online Transaction Processing. Is is service that supports day to day transactions, and also administers the transactions of an organization

A - Atomicity
C - Concurrency/Consistency
I - Isolation
D - Durability

Examples : ATM validations, Card/Pin/OTP/2 way authentication/Transactions
note : The primary objective of OLTP is data processing and not analysis

OLAP creates a single platform for all types of business analysis, which includes Planning,budgeting, forecasting and analysis, while OLTP is useful for daily transaction management 

OLAP is characterised by large volumes of data, while OLTP is characterised by large number of online transactions

OLAP uses uniquely created datawarehouse, which can integrate with different data sources, while OLTP uses traditional database

Drawbacks/Challenges : Implementation and maintenance are dependent on the IT professionals, since OLAP tools need a complicated modelling procedures.
OLAP tools need co-operation between people of various departments to be effective, which may not be always possible

Drawbacks/Challenges : If OLTP systems face hardware failures, then online transactions get affected severly. OLTP systems allow multiple users to access, to change the same data at the same time can sometime lead to unprecedented situations

Transactions : Is a Unit of Execution
      Database Transactions consists of
    - DML
    - One DDl
    - One DCL
begins when the first transaction statement is executed, and ends when any one of the following occurs 
      1. Rollback/Commit
      2. Autocommit
      3. User Exits
      4. System Crashes

Fact Table : Stores all quantitative information for analysis, and is often denormalised. It consists of 2 types of columns. The foreign key column that connects to the dimension table, and the other is measure column that contains the data that is being analysed


Dimension Table : Stores data about the ways in which the data in the fact table can be analysed

Eg : Fact - Product Sales

Time Info.		Products		Customer		Units Sold
8.00               1                  4                 15
8.00               3                  2                  5
9.14               1                  1                 20
9.23               2                  4                 7 

Dimension Table

1. Customer Centric
2. Product centric
3. Time Centric
4. Region Specific
5. Quantity analysis

Various OLAP Systems:
 1. HOLAP - Hybrid OLAP
 2. MOLAP - Multidimensinal OLAP
 3. ROALP - Relational OLAP 

The process of moving from finer granular data to a coarser data is called as Roll Up, and the opposite is called drill down

Star Schema 					vs				Snowflake Schema

1 Fact and Dimensions tables     						Fact, Dimensions, and Sub Dimensions tables
Top-Down Model									Bottom Up Model
Uses More Space									Uses Less Space
Normalization is not used							Normalized and Un normalised data is used
Design is Simple									Design is complex
Takes Less time for Query Execution						Takes more time for Query Execution
Query Complexity is less							Query Complexity is high
Understanding is easy								Undestranding is difficult
Less no. of Foreign Keys							More no. of Foreign keys
Data Redundancy is high								Data Redundancy is low

Galaxy Schema : Based on hierarchy levels, more than one fact table, seperate dimensions are possible. Can be built by splitting star into multiple stars. Useful in aggregating the fact tables

Hierarchial queries : Are a form of recursive query to retrieve hierarchy data (eg Organization data-employee reporting to ?)family tree

-If we are using IMS database(IBMs Information Management System), then there is no need for Hierarchial Queries. If using other commercial databases, then we need to write h-queries for hierarchial data

There are 3 types of H-Query Syntax
 1. Connect By - Oracle,DB2,Informix,PostgreSql
 2. CTE - MS SQL server 
 3. ANSI SQL
